From Hanselman it's dotcom
it's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 75. Recorded live
Tuesday, July 24th, 2007. Support for Hanselman
it's just provided by Tellerik
RIT controls. The most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forums and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers journal the world's
leading.net developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott talks
with John Lamb at the OSCON
conference about the iron Ruby.
Pre-alpha one release. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman, and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. I'm here at the
O'Reilly opensource conference, Oz con
with John Lamb. And did you
announce today that you're doing
today is Monday by the
way? Yeah, I announced it
2:00 AM today on Monday. What
did you announce? So we,
we shipped our first source
distribution of the iron Ruby
implementation from Microsoft. So you
shipped your shipped iron Ruby.
This means you shipped your
first drop and I saw
that it was labeled pre-alpha
one. Yeah. And I downloaded
it off of your website,
but what's the plan for
where that's going to be
hosted. So down the road,
right. What we want to
do is we want this
thing to be hosted up
on Ruby for right. Which
is the community site for
Ruby software development. And right
now we had to just
ship it out as a
zip file on my blog,
simply because it was a
quick, as easy, as low
as friction way to get
the code out there to
people. And the plan is
to get it up on
Ruby forage. And I understand
that you're going to be
taking contributions. Yep, absolutely. So
that's probably the biggest announcement
there is, you know, not
only are we going to
be up on Ruby forest
by the end of August,
but we are going to
be accepting community contributions back
into a subset of the,
the iron Ruby language project.
Right? So specifically that subset
is in the libraries. What
we're doing initially is we're
going to reserve the compiler
pieces, right? So we're going
to keep that we're not
going to accept contributions back
into the compiler pieces for
a very, very good reason.
And that reason is today.
Our Ruby is built on
top of another piece of
software that my team creates,
which is called the dynamic
language runtime. And so the
DLR is not in Microsoft
in terms of fully baked,
right? So in essence, we,
we don't have public interfaces
for this thing yet. And
code is still kind of
migrating back and forth between
what is in the DLR
and what is in the
compilers. So until we confirm
up those interfaces, right, and
until we can get to
essentially a 1.0 quality release
with publicly defined API APIs
for the DLR, we can't
accept contributions back because potentially
external code could wind up.
And in Microsoft terms, tainting,
the deal are which we'll
ship with a CLR and
all that kind of stuff.
So we simply can't have
that happen. But once we
get these public interfaces inside
of the DLR itself, then
we will fully open up
the arm, Ruby compiler, to
all community contribution. Now I
spent the better part of
today. This is Monday, and
I think this podcast is
being listened to on Friday
with my intern, with my
own high school entrance. And
we took the iron Ruby
stuff and we built up
using Scott Guthrie's a hello
world example, a WPF example
that we wrote it in
notepad. And it calls a
C-sharp client that is a,
a rest front end, pulls
out some C-sharp type, like
an array of accounts. And
we go and pull some
information down from a financial
services website. And we put
that account balances information into
a WPF app. So we
had C-sharp in there from
a library that we wrote.
We had some WPF and
Dutton at three O all
talking together. And, and as
I said on my blog
post, that it was very,
very, you know, pre-alpha and
I was accepting that, but
what I thought was really
interesting was the kinds of
stuff that we bumped into
stuff that, you know, just
wasn't done yet, gave me
a lot of insight into
the kind of work that
you would you guys need
to do. For example, I
got back on a Ray
of accounts, I put it
in a variable called a
and then I said a
square bracket, zero to pull
an account out. And I
got, You probably got nothing.
You've probably got a missing
method, exception, right? Missing method,
exception, square back at square
bar. Yep. So the, the
important thing, and actually what's
interesting is, you know, now
that I think about what
happened to you there, you
probably could have walked up
to that class, right. That
represented the.net type and added
the square bracket method yourself.
And that's interesting. I had
that thought myself, cause I
ended up just calling get
value because get value was
on system, not array. And
I said, well, I wonder
if I could use the
method missing features to go
in and build this thing
up and make it look
the way I want it.
Yeah. We, we, we fully
support method missing in, in
the, in the, the, the
set of bits that we
shipped today in the future,
we're going to do a
bunch of auto magic stuff.
Right? So a lot of
these things I've already done
in a former life when
I built Ruby CLR. So
in Ruby CLR, when I
detect that you're marshaling a
type from the CLR that
implements the numerable interface, I
do all the right things.
I provide an each implementation
for UI. I auto mix
in the innumerable module as
well, or the numerable sense.
And so then you can
use all the standard Ruby
idioms for iterating over, you
know, some collection. That was
the thing I thought was
really interesting was that it
didn't feel very Rubiez because
each time I wanted to
use a Ruby, it wasn't,
it wasn't there yet. And
I could, and I started
looking at the source and
that was what was so
much fun. It was to
figure out, Oh, I see
where John and team are
going to have to get
in there and hook this
up. Yep. We were doing,
I, I brought in a
single a system, not single.
I typed it as a
float, came in as assistant,
not single. I wanted to
do a two string. It
looks like it wasn't there.
So then I ended up
switching it to a double
and two string was there.
Yep. And then I went
and looked at some of
the built-ins that you had
in the Ruby stuff. You've
got like fixed numb. Can
you talk about that? I
thought that fixed them was
an extension of an integer.
Is that a derivation? So
no, it's not an extension,
right? It is a type
substitution. So in essence, what
we're doing is we're saying
that, okay, anytime where you
see an end, right. Instead,
please treat this as the
Ruby type, fixing them. Right.
So, you know, all of
our method, dispatch code, essentially,
where you can essentially dispatch
against an editor and it
goes, Oh, okay. I know
exactly where we need to
route this method as to
the fixed one type. So
what, you'll see if you'll
look in the implementation, there's
like a, there's a file
called initializer dot generated dot
CS, which is a giant,
like hundred K file right
now on the sources. If
you look inside there, that's
essentially the file where we,
we Mark these methods, which
are effectively extension methods, especially
using attributes. When you're looking
through the source code, I'm
sure you saw lots and
lots of attributes sitting on
top of methods. So what
we do is we, we've
got a little tool that
will go through the methods,
read the, the metadata, right?
The, the attributes. And then
we will cogent out a
bunch of goop, right. To
essentially say, okay, well, you
know, this is the name
of the class. It has
this set of methods on
it. Right. And it really
represents this dot that type
in that case. So You're
my ignorance if I use
the wrong words, but is,
is, is type substitution, the
equivalent of what I would
have thought of as marshaling.
Are we moving from one
word? Nope. Well, no, because
an integer is an integer.
Right. So, so essentially what
we're saying is that any
time that Ruby implementation, cause
remember the river implementation runs
on top of the CLR.
So it is using things
like, and Moving in and
out of universities like we
did with comments. No, no.
And quite unlike, you know,
a Ruby CLR where yeah.
I had a Marshall types
across the boundary, right. Because
across, you know, there were
two completely different worlds, right.
One is a sea based
interpreter. And the other thing
is, is the CLR, right?
So everything is just in
the CLR. We're essentially giving
you a different view over
the types that you currently
have today in the CLR.
If I, if I knew
up a string in the,
in the ruby.net, when the
iron Ruby world. Right. Okay.
And I passed that string
into my C sharp library.
What, what happened there? I
mean, the string is still
sitting somewhere On the heat.
So one thing to really
remember is, is that what's
different between Ruby and most
other implementations is that the
Ruby strings are mutable strings,
right? CLR strings are immutable
strings. So we have to
convert when we cross the
quote unquote boundary, right. So
the way strings work. Exactly.
And if you take a
closer look at the way
implemented the extension methods and
the various types in our
libraries, what I generally do
is I, we, we, we
wind up having an overload
of the method, takes a
regular CLR string. And then
also another overload that takes
a mutable string. So the
design of the library is
such that we want to
stay as strongly typed as
possible wherever we can. And
in cases where, you know,
the typing or the parameter
typing past it. And while
we can't determine that, right,
then we'll accept objects and
we'll do conversions and stuff.
Right. So there's all sorts
of patterns in the Ruby
library, for example, where you
can pass them random objects.
Right. And what the library
will do is attempt to
call to ENT or actually
attempt to see whether or
not there's a two inch
method implemented on that object.
If it finds that, then
it does a different thing
with it. Right. Essentially treats
it as an integer. Yeah.
So for the purpose of
some of the, some of
the viewers may not necessarily
know the difference or remember
the difference between a mutable
string and an immutable string.
So if you could just
speak on that for just
a moment as a reminder.
So when you create a
CLR string, right, once it's
being created, you cannot change
the contents of the string,
every single API that you
would call on a string
that you would imagine is
changing the string. It doesn't
actually change the string. It
actually creates a new string
with the modification inside of
that string. So your implementation
of immutable string of, I
remember correctly from looking at
the source code, it had
a string. Yep, exactly. So
today and that that's an
implementation detail, right. So today,
so you'll also notice that
unlike trying to do that
type substitution thing that I
did with, with fixed Naaman
integer, instead we wrapped a
string builder and immutable string.
The reason why is that
eventually string builder is going
to go away in our
implementation. I see the reason
why is that Ruby itself
treat strings is biter res
not char res, right? So
effectively a string builder is
a, is a dynamic char
array. And so for that
reason, and for compatibility with
Ruby, you know, somewhere down
the road, we're going to
swap out the implementation was
strangled her and swap in,
you know, a mutable binder.
Right. And as, as, as
you said, that certainly an
implementation detail, I just found
it to be a project
particularly interesting one. So in
that case, strings are really
the special case, as it
seems with almost all languages,
right? We, we keep saying
stranger strings, but ultimately every
language has its different perspective
on how a string should
operate. Now. I noticed that
a number of times I
had to call two string
200 score string, and 200
score asks, are those things
200? No, no two under
STR and two under us.
Right. Okay. For the two
different methods. So what two
Hunter STR is it's another
one of these Ruby signal
methods effectively. So, so what
Ruby does or whether it
be libraries do, is they
walk up to that object
and invokes a respond to
write on that system respond
to, to serve yes or
no. And if so, it
treats that thing as a
string and invokes other meds.
So effectively treats as a
duct type string, Hey, say
something about duck typing for
while. Sure. So duct typing,
you know, so it's, there's
that old saying, if it
walks like a duck and
quacks like a duck, then
a probably is a duck.
So you're essentially saying woven
object responds to the methods
that I would expect a
string to respond to, then
it must be a string.
Right. So is it supposed
as simple as that? So
the, so back to the
idea about using to under
stir, it's one of these
marker things, right? 200 inches,
another one of these marker
things inside of the Ruby
libraries. So we just simply
go off and check to
see if it's a string.
And if so, then we
retreated as a string. From
that point onwards In his
process, there are a number
of times where I passed
an object in and then
had to call to, you
know, to string on the
object. But then once I
actually ended up having to
call you, and you had
me call a secret method
called two CLR string. Right.
And is that something that
I'm not going to have
to think about in the
future? Oh, well, right now
that was just the most
obvious way for us to
deal with what happens when
we need to convert immutable
string into a CLR string
is essentially force you to
explicitly do it down the
road. We will, you know,
do some magic to take
care of that for you.
Sure. And even though there
were a couple of things
like that, that I, that
I bumped into, it was
funny. We were looking at,
at the code and it
was a mess of comments
and whatnot. We ended up
stripping all the comments out
and it was, it was
pretty simple. I mean, really
the, there was nothing to
it. We spent more time
a print together what the
WPF XAML was going to
look like doing it by
code building the object model
ourselves. Yep. Now, how do
you anticipate this is going
to be used? I assume
it will be a first
among equals kind of a
situation where I can do
anything. If I feel like
doing WPF and Ruby or
ASP, You shouldn't have any
inherent limitations in terms of
the kinds of libraries that
you should be able to
consume from this from, from
our implementation. You know, I
think there's a number of
really interesting scenarios that you
can look at. You know,
the Silverlight one being one
of the obvious ones, because,
you know, right now today,
nobody else really has the
ability to run Ruby in
the browser potentially across an
extremely large deployed base of,
you know, browser supports Silverlight.
So, you know, and also
cross platform between Mac and
windows. So, you know, that
that's a really interesting rich
opportunity for us and, and
WPF style programming. Right. I'm
not sure what the actual
name of it internally we
call it SPF, but I'm
sure there's some other kind
of name for, for what,
so it was SPF Silverlight
presentation foundation. I think so.
Right. But I think it's
acronym status has been revoked,
so I don't think it
needs anything. Yeah. So I
still call those guys the
SPF guys. And so that
programming model is, you know,
I think in need of
having some additional support, right.
For billing applications, if you
look up the Silverlight stuff,
it's a very, you know,
low-level API essentially for doing
drawing and presentation. So, so
given that what we would
really like to be able
to do is go off
and build a library and
makes so much easier, much
more approachable, right. For people
to go off and do
that stuff. And I think
that Ruby would just be
a wonderful language for using
to experiment with building out
such a framework. Yeah. So
of course I don't work
for Microsoft yet. All right.
I'm going to go to
work for Microsoft September. Congratulations,
possession September 3rd. So until then,
I'm sure I can get
myself into a lot more
trouble. Although I plan on
getting into plenty of trouble
once I get there, I
always thought it would be
a really interesting scenario to
have the rails programmers build
some kind of a Silverlight
support gem, such that the
relationship between Ruby on the
server side and Ruby on
the client side would become
something maybe unique to that,
to that environment, that somehow
they would come up with
ways to serialize objects in
and out, perhaps via Jason,
such that it would invent
a new kind, a new
kind of a deployment, a
new kind of programming, such
that the browser and the
big fat Pentium, four core
two, that's not doing any
work today would actually start
doing some really serious, heavy
lifting. And it would almost
add like a new tier
two classic three tier. Yeah.
And I think that would
be a really interesting thing
place for people to explore
with some of the options,
right? Cause certainly, you know,
the, you know, instead of
using RGS to go off
and generate JavaScript, it goes
off and runs on the
client. Right. You can just
emit some Ruby code and
I can go off and
run on the client as
well. And I think that
having a language that makes
it easier for you to
build modular software like Ruby
I'm on the client, it's
going to really do a
lot. And you know, in
spur a lot of innovation,
I think in, in, in
the browser Now iron Ruby
is adding to the dynamic
language, you know, the list
of dynamic languages that are
supported. We had Python, we're
going to have JavaScript. We've
also gonna have VB VBX,
dynamic, visual. Yep. Some tubing
named product that is the
visual basics, At least for
dynamic languages. I know that
you guys had a language
lab and they had the
guys that do languages like
boo. And I think someone
was talking about doing a
squeak implementation. So there was
BU there was there, there
was some guys that do
cold fusion there, there there's
of course a Peter Fisk
who on the outside is
building the smalltalk implementation as
well that runs inside the
browser Vista smalltalk and, and
other people. Right. So it's,
I think that there's going
to be a lot of
opportunities again, for people to,
to, especially once there's more
code cause DLR still isn't
fully baked. And so once
we have some more code,
more examples, more programming languages
and some documentation and that
kind of stuff. Right. I
think it's going to make
it a lot easier for
people to make some progress.
Although Peter Fisk, you know,
was the current state of
this stuff, we just dropped
a pile of source code
on him and he's been
making fantastic progress. So do
you anticipate, it will be
people like that who will
push the new, you know,
the new updates and who
are going to contribute the
most source code is going
to be language. Yeah. Yeah.
I think that, well, there's
several places, right. You know,
it's, it's the classic, you
got a scratch and itch
kind of thing right. In
open source. So if there's
something that's bothering you right
now, I think that, you
know, filling that gap by
building some libraries or contributing
to libraries and stuff, right?
Like you don't need to
be a compiler geek in
order to go off and
build some libraries. Right. And
to port some existing libraries
over it. So those are
the kinds of things that
I think are going to
be opportunities for all sorts
of people to contribute Notches,
compiler geeks. Well, I really
appreciate you taking the time
to come and talk to
me today. I know that
you're in between sessions right
now and we're sitting in
the hallway here. Sure. And
thanks a lot. And I
encourage the listeners to go
and check this out, start
poking around. It is a
it's early, but it's a
lot of fun to see
this kind of development going
on, particularly around dynamic languages.
In my last show, the
interns were talking about how
they said dynamic languages are
just easier. It's just, it's
just more pleasant to program
in. Sure. It's very fun
to see the, almost the
arm wrestling that's going on
as C-sharp continues to evolve
into a more dynamic language
as VB kind of reinvents
itself, or we asserts itself
as a dynamic language to
see these other languages come
in. Yeah. It's almost like
the promise of.net when it
first came out was going
to be,  now 2007,
that's actually happening. Yeah. And
I think that's a really
exciting time to be working
for our team right now.
Thanks a lot. And this
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. We'll see you
next week. .